---
layout: post
title:  "Build Log 1"
date:   2015-02-07 12:52:03
categories: build
---

Tensegrity was originally a project built during the southern hemisphere summer of 2014/2015 for [Kiwiburn 2015](http://kiwiburn.com). I had the original concept shortly after the previous Kiwiburn where I built ["The Sensorium"](https://github.com/ferrouswheel/sensorium), but this was way more ambitious for my skillset. The idea was: a 3m high cylinder of criss crossing metal pipes with led strips, with the whole structure spun at 1-2 revs per second atop a 3m high pole.

{% include image.html url='Picture_3.jpeg' description='Shitty napkin drawing, which illustrates a discussion about having lots of spinning things in alignment, vs one big structure (birds eye view)' %}

{% include image.html url='Picture_1.jpeg' description='Still shitty, but slightly better concept drawing - for some reason I insist on building things with curves.' %}

This ended up being quite ambitious. I knew nothing about slip rings, welding, or working with metal when I started. The result ended up a bit different but something I'm very pleased with:

{% youtube GcaEiZJVKXA %}

As a scientist and software developer, I’m happy working with complex ideas and creating elegant representations of abstract concepts, but giant spinning metal sculptures I knew nothing about!

I called out to my community for people keen to help me with this audacious idea, and had many wonderful people offer assistance. The most valuable in making the project succeed (and in easing my trepidation at trying to pull this off) was that of [Patrick Herd](http://www.pnuke.co.nz/) who took the lead on the mechanical engineer and construction techniques, and [Felicia Ulsted](http://feliciaullstad.com/) who helped with the metal working and construction.

Tensegrity is what I’d consider my first serious foray into doing art installations, and while I’m very happy with the end result, the real joy came from everything I learnt during it and seeing other people’s reactions at Kiwiburn!

Without further ado, here’s the story of it’s construction.

## Electric motors and AC drives

Patrick, getting into the idea, browsed [Trademe](http://trademe.co.nz) and found both a second-hand motor and an AC drive. I bought them up, along with a Himel box to store and protect the gubbins from the weather.

{% include image.html url='2014-10-18%2012.30.04.jpg' description='I guess one horse is enough to spin things around?' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-10-18%2012.23.55.jpg' description='The gruntiest electric motor I’ve bought since racing Tamiya cars.' %}

{% include image.html url='Picture_2.jpeg' description='Turns out AC drives and giant motors are somewhat industrial in nature, so while the wiring was pretty simple I left it to Patrick to wire things up' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-10-18%2012.25.09.jpg' description='The motor could be wired up in delta or star configuration.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-10-18%2012.31.08.jpg' description='The wiring on the AC drive was slightly more complex.' %}

It was as grunty as anticipated. Only 60 rpm (1 rev/sec), but just try stopping it from turning! And while a small axle spinning at that speed looks slow, the outer edge of a 2m diameter cylinder spun by it would be travelling ~6.3 m/s.

## Simulation

Before starting on the construction, I wanted to be able to visualise what it’d look like and make sure the concept was right. I also wanted to be able to start programming visual patterns before the main structure was completed. For the Sensorium, I only had one plasma-like effect, due to time constraints and it seemed a shame to not have more patterns ready to go. I didn’t want to be caught out in the same way!

Also, when your art is large, it’s much harder to play around with ideas than from the comfort of your computer desk (ok, so I could have done so because it had wireless, see later, but still).

I used [Processing](https://processing.org) to create a simple 3d representation of the main parts.

{% include image.html url='simulation_straight_and_curved.png' description='Straight or curved struts for the LEDs?' %}

The image on the right is the design we went with, but the image on the left is the original concept (and has more connection to [the concept of Tensegrity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tensegrity), it also reflects a structure that my really old evolutionary spring/physics experiment [biobox](https://github.com/ferrouswheel/biobox) would often stabilise)

This simulation allowed several things:

- working out the measurements of the curved struts between the arms. These measurements were necessary for cutting and bending the metal piping we ended up using. Similarly, it meant I could order the right amount of LED tape needed.
- creating pixel layout files for each channel of [openpixelcontrol](http://openpixelcontrol.org/) (OPC) data.
- creating fadecandy server config file for mapping OPC data to the physical layout of fadecandies and strips (see later).
- Most awesomely, it has really basic OPC server so that I could start writing effects that directly controlled the simulation. All I would have to do to move to using the effects on the finished physical product is change the IP address the pattern generator was sending data to!

Of course, all this functionality was only in the finished product and it took me several refactorings and iterations to get to this point.

A side benefit of creating this simulation is that we are discussing the idea of letting people (specifically design or computer science students) submit patterns to us before an event so that they can see their light pattern on the final product. With a simulation, they can test the patterns out before submission.

## Metal structure

Once the structure was confirmed, Patrick had a plan to turn it into metal.

{% include image.html url='Picture.jpeg' description='We picked up a bunch of tubing from Wellington Steel and Tube.' %}

Patrick’s vision for the structure, with the additional constraint that it had be transportable, was to have a centre axle made of scaffold pipe with coupling nuts welded to it. Four arms at the top and bottom would then have matching size threading spot-welded into them. This meant each arm could be screwed into place and their distance adjusted to match any measurement errors due to manufacturing.

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2011.55.56.jpg' description='Chopping metal to length with a drop saw and grinding plate. I have a new appreciation of having the right tools for the right job after envisaging hacksawing metal pipes.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2014.15.23.jpg' description='One side of the arms had holes for spot welding the threads in place.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2014.24.05.jpg' description='The holes for the weld were drilled like so.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2014.15.29.jpg' description='The other side had slots grinded out for tags to be welded on (this is where the outer layer of curved struts are bolted onto).' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2014.15.11.jpg' description='These are said tags that slide into the ends of the arms.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2015.43.38.jpg' description='Drilling these, and other tags for the inner arms, resulted in lots of metal shavings (not anything unique, but I’m a freaking software guy, so I find this stuff fascinating.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2015.44.08.jpg' description='Here are the tags at the end of the arms, welded in place.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2015.44.13.jpg' description='And the thread welded in place.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2015.44.20.jpg' description='Two down, 6 to go! (Two of them not shown)' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2015.44.35.jpg' description='The tags for the inner struts were smaller, and eventually welded on along the arms.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2018.56.10.jpg' description='With the arms mostly done, it was time to work on the main axle. Welding the coupling nuts at even angles using nothing but wooden blocks, because I’m still paying off a student loan and can’t afford a workshop.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-26%2019.55.21.jpg' description='And then boom, with the axle and arms, we finally reify the idea such that we all start getting really excited about the final result. With help from the art deco fence, spare scaff pipe, and scaff clamps for mounting.' %}

{% include image.html url='CIMG8223.JPG' description='A close up of the coupling nuts connected to the axle.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-28%2008.12.57.jpg' description='At this stage, Patrick taught me to weld so I did my best to make straight lines without moving too quickly.' %}

{% include image.html url='2014-12-31%2010.46.47.jpg' description='We then got to the point of creating some curved struts to go between the arms. Patrick happened to have one these handy manual pipe rollers, which allow you to gradually add a curve to a length of pipe.' %}

{% include image.html url='IMG_2055.JPG' description='To calculate the curvature, I cheated and pretended the helical curves were curved in only one dimension and drew the curve on the concrete in chalk...' %}

{% include image.html url='IMG_2057%202.JPG' description='Which we compared the rolled pipes to.' %}

{% include image.html url='CIMG8225.JPG' description='We also had to create some braces for support and to keep the arms at a regular spacing. Here they are with the metal tags fitted but yet to be welded in place.' %}

{% include image.html url='CIMG8226.JPG' description='Before we add the braces.' %}

{% include image.html url='CIMG8281.JPG' description='After.' %}

{% include image.html url='CIMG8294.JPG' description='Half way through the project, Patrick decided he wanted a more grunty welder!' %}

{% include image.html url='IMG_2041.JPG' description='The previous welder, kindly lent to us by (Grist)[http://stuffidestroyed.tumblr.com/], performed admirably, but would start to overheat (hence the jerry-rigged silver fan to try to keep things a bit cooler).' %}

{% include image.html url='2015-01-01%2017.14.28.jpg' description='With the outer layer in place.' %}

{% include image.html url='CIMG8288.JPG' description='What the corners look like up close.' %}

{% include image.html url='IMG_2064.JPG' description='Next went the inner struts, which face the same direction as the outer layer.' %}

